>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR JANUARY 8: DONALD TRUMP'S
TOP PICKS TO SERVE IN HIS
ADMINISTRATION PREPARE FOR
CONFIRMATION HEARINGS STARTING
THIS WEEK.
THE MAN ACCUSED OF THE MASS
SHOOTING AT FORT LAUDERDALE'S
AIRPORT FACES CHARGES THAT CARRY
THE DEATH PENALTY.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT:
INCARCERATED TEENS-- WHAT IS THE
RIGHT AGE TO PROSECUTE AND LOCK
UP JUVENILES AS ADULTS?
NEXT ON "PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
THE MEN AND WOMEN WHO WOULD
SERVE IN DONALD TRUMP'S CABINET
BEGIN CONFIRMATION HEARINGS
BEFORE U.S. SENATE COMMITTEES
THIS WEEK.
BUT THE SCHEDULING IS IN
DISPUTE, BECAUSE THE NONPARTISAN
OFFICE OF GOVERNMENT ETHICS SAYS
SOME NOMINEES, WITHOUT NAMING
THEM, HAVEN'T SUBMITTED ALL THE
FINANCIAL AND PERSONAL DOCUMENTS
NEEDED TO FINISH THE VETTING FOR
POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF
INTEREST.
HEARINGS ARE PLANNED IN THE
COMING DAYS FOR KEY MEMBERS OF
THE PRESIDENT-ELECT'S NATIONAL
SECURITY TEAM: EXXON-MOBIL
C.E.O. REX TILLERSON TO BECOME
SECRETARY OF STATE; GENERAL
JAMES MATTIS FOR DEFENSE
SECRETARY; GENERAL JOHN KELLY
FOR HOMELAND SECURITY SECRETARY;
CONGRESSMAN MIKE POMPEO FOR
C.I.A. DIRECTOR; AND SENATOR
JEFF SESSIONS FOR ATTORNEY
GENERAL.
THE SENATE CALENDAR ALSO
INCLUDES HEARINGS FOR FORMER
LABOR SECRETARY ELAINE CHAO TO
BECOME TRANSPORTATION
SECRETARY; FAST FOOD CHAIN
C.E.O. ANDREW PUZDER FOR LABOR
SECRETARY; BUSINESSMAN WILBUR
ROSS FOR COMMERCE SECRETARY;
REFORM ADVOCATE BETSY DEVOS FOR
EDUCATION SECRETARY; AND DOCTOR
BEN CARSON FOR SECRETARY OF
HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT.
THE SENATE'S REPUBLICAN MAJORITY
LEADER, MITCH MCCONNELL OF
KENTUCKY, SAID TODAY THE
CONFIRMATION PROCESS SHOULD NOT
SLOW DOWN, AND THE DEMOCRATS'
PROCEDURAL COMPLAINTS STEM FROM
FRUSTRATION OVER LOSING THE
ELECTION.
>> WE NEED TO SORT OF GROW UP
HERE AND GET PAST THAT.
WE NEED TO HAVE THE PRESIDENT'S
NATIONAL SECURITY TEAM IN PLACE
ON DAY ONE, AND PAPERS ARE STILL
COMING IN, AND SO I AM
OPTIMISTIC WE WILL BE ABLE TO
GET UP TO SEVEN NOMINEES ON DAY
ONE JUST LIKE WE DID EIGHT YEARS
AGO.
>> Sreenivasan: BUT TODAY, THE
SENATE'S DEMOCRATIC MINORITY
LEADER, CHARLES SCHUMER OF NEW
YORK, SAID IN A STATEMENT:
"SENATE REPUBLICANS ARE TRYING
TO RAM THEM THROUGH AS QUICKLY
AS POSSIBLE.
UNTIL THESE NOMINEES HAVE FULLY
COOPERATED WITH THE ETHICS
REVIEW PROCESS, THE HEARINGS AND
CONFIRMATION SCHEDULE SHOULD NOT
BE RUSHED."
FOR MORE ON THE CONFIRMATION
PROCESS, I'M JOINED FROM
WASHINGTON BY "NEWSHOUR"
POLITICAL DIRECTOR LISA
DESJARDINS.
WHY IS THIS BACK AND FORTH
HAPPENING THIS TIME?
I MEAN IS THE ORDER
TRADITIONALLY DIFFERENT IN HOW
THIS PROCESS MOVES FORWARD?
>> YES.
THERE ARE SOME THINGS HAPPENING
THIS TIME AROUND THAT HAVE NOT
HAPPENED BEFORE.
LET'S START WITH THE LOGISTICS.
THE DIRECTOR OF THE OFFICE OF
GOVERNMENT ETHICS WROTE A LETTER
AND SAID THE PROBLEM FROM HIS
POINT OF VIEW IS THAT THE TRUMP
TRANSITION TEAM DID NOT SUBMIT
ANY OF THESE NAMES BEFORE THEY
MADE THEM PUBLIC.
HE SAYS THAT'S WHAT USUALLY
HAPPENS.
THEY CLEAR THESE NOMINEES BEFORE
A PRESIDENT TO BE ACTUALLY
ANNOUNCES THEM.
IN THIS CASE, THE ETHICS OFFICE
SAID THEY GOT THESE NAMES LATE
AND IN SOME CASES THE ETHICS
OFFICE SAYS THEY STILL DON'T
HAVE ANY INITIAL PAPERWORK FOR
NOMINEES WHOSE HEARINGS ARE
COMING UP WITHIN DAYS.
THEN THE POLITICS IS LESS
COMPLICATED TO EXPLAIN.
BOTH SIDES HAVE A LOT IN THIS
FIGHT.
THE REPUBLICANS WANT TO BUILD UP
DONALD TRUMP.
THE DEMOCRATS WANT TO START OUT
WITH A ROCKY STEP FOR HIM.
>> WHAT CAN THE DEMOCRATS DO.
WE HEARD SENATOR CHUCK SCHUMER
SAY TODAY LET'S BE DELIBERATE
AND SLOW ABOUT THIS PROCESS.
BUT WHEN IT COMES TO EITHER
BLOCKING A NOMINEE OR CHANGING
THE SCHEDULE.
>> RIGHT, WHEN A SENATOR SAYS
LET'S BE DELIBERATE, THAT OFTEN
MEANS LET'S USE ALL OF OUR
POWERS TO LENGTHEN THE TIME IT
TAKES TO GET SOMETHING DONE.
THAT'S REALLY THE ONLY THING
THEY CAN DO, HARI.
REPUBLICANS HAVE THE VOTES TO
GET THROUGH ALL OF THESE
NOMINEES.
THEY JUST HAVE A MAJORITY VOTE.
THEY HAVE 52 IN THE SENATE.
WHAT DEMOCRATS CAN DO IS TRY
AND USE THE BULLY PULPIT PO TO
GET ACROSS QUESTIONS THEY HAVE
ABOUT THE TRUMP TRANSITION AND
TRY AND SLOW THING ITS DOWN.
>> WHILE WE'RE TALKING A LOT
ABOUT THIS, AND THINK BEING
THIS, THIS ISN'T HAPPENING IN
IRAQ.
ARE THERE OTHER THINGS ALSO
SIMULTANEOUSLY HAPPENING ON
CAPITOL HILL THIS WEEK?
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
THIS IS GOING TO BE ANOTHER WEEK
WHERE WE ARE WATCHING PROGRESS
OR NOT OF THE AFFORDABLE CARE
ACT REPEAL.
THE SENATE WILL GO THROUGH
SOMETHING CALLED VOTEORAMA WHICH
WILL BE THE FIRST PUSH GETTING
TOWARD ACA REPEAL IT IS A
SEVERAL STEP PROCESS BUT THAT IS
SOMETHING IMPORTANT TO WATCH.
IT MAY GET LOST IN THE FLURRY OF
CONFIRMATION HEARINGS.
WE'VE GOT TEN NOMINEES COMING UP
ON THE HILL THAT IS NO ACCIDENT.
REPUBLICANS WANT TO GET THEM OUT
AS QUICKLY AS POSSIBLE.
EVEN IF WE DON'T HAVE ALL THE
INFORMATION, WE USUALLY WOULD
FOR THESE NOMINEES AND HEARINGS,
REPUBLICANS WANT TO GET IT DONE.
>> WHAT ARE EXAMPLES OF CONFLICT
OF INTEREST THAT HAVE COME UP IN
THE PAST OR WHAT ARE YOU LOOKING
AT NOW, WERE YOU REPORTING THIS
OUT YESTERDAY.
>> I THINK THERE ARE A LOT OF
THINGS TO LOOK AT HERE.
LET'S TAKE THE EXAMPLE OF A
NOMINEE LIKE REX TILLERSON.
HIS ETHICS PACKAGE HAS BEEN
POSTED.
WE KNOW HE'S THE C.E.O., HE HAS
NOW LEFT EXXON MOBILE.
IS HE INVOLVED WITH MANY BOARDS
AND HE HAS SORT OF-- HE HAS
CLEARLY A LARGE FINANCIAL STAKES
IN MANY COMPANIES INCLUDING
EXXON MOBILE THAT MIGHT HAVE
INFLUENCE ON HIM AS SECRETARY OF
STATE.
SO IN HIS ETHICS LETTER, HE GOES
THROUGH HOW HE IS DIVESTING FROM
THAT.
HOW HE IS SEVERING HIS TIES
VERY SIGNIFICANT FINANCIAL TIES
FROM MANY COMPANIES.
THAT'S WHAT IS IMPORTANT HERE.
AND WE KNOW THAT FOUR NOMINEES
COMING UP THIS NEXT WEEK, SO FAR
HAVEN'T GIVEN THAT ETHICS
PACKAGE IN YET.
THAT INCLUDES ANOTHER
BILLIONAIRE, BET SEE DEVOS WHO
HOPES TO BE A SECRETARY OF
EDUCATION.
WILBUR ROSS WHO HOPES TO BE THE
SECRETARY OF COMMERCE.
THE PEOPLE WITH EXTENSIVE TIES
FINANCIAL AND ALSO TO
FOUNDATIONS.
AND THERE'S A LOT OF QUESTIONS
THAT I THINK AMERICANS AND
CERTAINLY DEMOCRATIC SENATOR WAS
LIKE TO RAISE, BUT THEY DON'T
EVEN HAVE A STARTING BASIS TO
KNOW THE FRAMEWORK FOR THESE
FOLKS FINANCIALS GOING INTO
THESE HEARINGS.
>> NEWSHOUR POLITICAL DIRECTOR
JOINING US FROM WASHINGTON
TONIGHT, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> MY PLEASURE
>> Sreenivasan: IN AN INTERVIEW
BROADCAST TODAY, PRESIDENT
BARACK OBAMA SAID IT'S IMPORTANT
FOR THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES, "TO KNOW WHAT YOU DON'T
KNOW."
MISTER OBAMA ALSO TOLD "ABC
NEWS" HE HOPES THE TRUMP
ADMINISTRATION STOPS DISPUTING
THE CONCLUSION BY THE
INTELLIGENCE COMMUNITY THAT
RUSSIA'S PRESIDENT DIRECTED A
HACK OF DEMOCRATIC PARTY
COMPUTERS IN ORDER TO STEER THE
ELECTION AGAINST HILLARY
CLINTON.
>> THE RUSSIANS INTENDED TO
MEDDLE, AND THEY MEDDLED.
AND IT COULD BE ANOTHER COUNTRY
IN THE FUTURE, IT COULD BE
ANOTHER ELECTION, UH, WHERE THE
ALIGNMENTS BETWEEN REPUBLICAN
AND DEMOCRATS ARE DIFFERENT THAN
THEY WERE THIS TIME AND, AND UH,
WHO A FOREIGN COUNTRY PREFERS.
AND THAT'S WHY I HOPE THIS
DOESN'T CONTINUE TO BE VIEWED
THROUGH A PARTISAN LENS.
>> Sreenivasan: INCOMING WHITE
HOUSE CHIEF OF STAFF REINCE
PRIEBUS SAID TODAY MISTER TRUMP
DOES NOW ACCEPT THAT MOSCOW WAS
BEHIND THE HACKS AND LEAKS OF
DEMOCRATIC EMAILS.
REPUBLICAN SENATORS JOHN McCAIN
AND LINDSEY GRAHAM ARE
INTRODUCING A BILL TO GIVE
PRESIDENT-ELECT TRUMP THE
OPPORTUNITY TO PUNISH RUSSIA
WITH MORE ECONOMIC SANCTIONS.
>> ALL I'M ASKING HIM IS TO
ACKNOWLEDGE THAT RUSSIA
INTERFERED, AND PUSH BACK.
IT COULD BE IRAN NEXT TIME.
IT COULD BE CHINA."
>> Sreenivasan: THE GUNMAN WHO
ALLEGEDLY MASSACRED FIVE
TRAVELERS AND WOUNDED SIX OTHERS
AT THE FORT LAUDERDALE, FLORIDA,
AIRPORT FRIDAY IS EXPECTED TO
APPEAR BEFORE A FEDERAL
MAGISTRATE TOMORROW.
ESTEBAN SANTIAGO FACES A CHARGE
OF COMMITTING AN ACT OF VIOLENCE
AT AN INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT
RESULTING IN DEATH.
IF CONVICTED OF THAT CHARGE,
SANTIAGO COULD FACE THE DEATH
PENALTY.
THE 26-YEAR OLD IRAQ WAR VETERAN
ALSO FACES WEAPONS CHARGES.
THE FBI SAYS IT HAS YET TO
DETERMINE THE REASONS FOR THE
ATTACK SANTIAGO ALLEGEDLY
CARRIED OUT WITH A SEMI-
AUTOMATIC HANDGUN.
HE RETRIEVED IT FROM A HARD CASE
THAT HE CHECKED IN ON HIS TRIP
FROM ANCHORAGE, ALASKA, WHERE HE
LIVES.
ANCHORAGE POLICE HAD CONFISCATED
A GUN FROM SANTIAGO IN NOVEMBER,
AFTER HE COMPLAINED TO THE FBI
THERE THAT THE U.S. GOVERNMENT
WAS CONTROLLING HIS MIND AND
FORCING HIM TO WATCH PROPAGANDA
VIDEOS MADE BY ISIS.
AFTER A MENTAL HEALTH
EVALUATION, SANTIAGO GOT HIS GUN
BACK IN DECEMBER, BECAUSE HE HAD
NOT BEEN FORMALLY JUDGED TO BE
MENTALLY ILL.
LIKE THE CHRISTMAS ATTACK IN
GERMANY AND LAST SUMMER'S ATTACK
IN NICE, FRANCE, TODAY IN
ISRAEL, A TRUCK PLOWED INTO A
GROUP OF PEOPLE IN JERUSALEM.
THE ATTACK KILLED FOUR SOLDIERS
AND INJURED MORE THAN A DOZEN
OTHERS-- THREE OF THE DEAD WERE
WOMEN IN THEIR EARLY 20'S.
THE SOLDIERS HAD JUST GOTTEN OFF
A BUS AND WERE STANDING ON A
POPULAR PROMENADE.
OTHER ISRAELI SOLDIERS SHOT AND
KILLED THE DRIVER, A PALESTINIAN
RESIDENT OF EAST JERUSALEM.
ISRAELI PRIME MINISTER BENJAMIN
NETANYAHU VISITED THE ATTACK
SITE AND SAID THE DRIVER WAS
LIKELY A SUPPORTER OF ISIS.
>> (translated): WE KNOW THAT
THERE HAS BEEN A SERIES OF
TERROR ATTACKS.
THERE DEFINITELY COULD BE A
CONNECTION BETWEEN THEM, FROM
FRANCE TO BERLIN AND NOW
JERUSALEM.
WE ARE FIGHTING THIS AFFLICTION
AND WE WILL OVERCOME IT.
>> Sreenivasan: HAMAS DID NOT
TAKE RESPONSIBILITY, BUT A
SPOKESMAN FOR THE MILITANT GROUP
THAT RULES GAZA PRAISED THE
ATTACK.
>> (translated): WE CONSIDER
IT TO BE A NATURAL REACTION TO
THE ISRAELI OCCUPATION'S
VIOLATIONS AND CRIMES AGAINST
OUR PEOPLE, OUR LAND AND HOLY
PLACES.
TODAY IN IRAQ, TWO SUICIDE
BOMBERS STRUCK BAGHDAD KILLING
AT LEAST 20 PEOPLE.
THE LATEST IN A WAVE OF ATTACKS
ON CIVILIANS.
ONE ATTACK OCCURRED IN A
WHOLESALE MARKET IN THE SHIITE
NEIGHBORHOOD OF SADR CITY.
THE OTHER HAPPENED IN A FRUIT
AND VEGETABLE MARKET IN ANOTHER
PREDOMINANTLY SHIITE
NEIGHBORHOOD OF THE CAPITAL.
ISIS CLAIMED RESPONSIBILITY FOR
ONE OF THE BOMBINGS.
MORE THAN 80 IRAQIS HAVE BEEN
KILLED IN TERRORIST ATTACKS
DURING THE LAST WEEK.
THE VIOLENCE IN BAGHDAD COMES AS
IRAQI MILITARY FORCES SAY THEY
ARE GAINING GROUND IN MOSUL,
IRAQ'S SECOND LARGEST CITY,
WHICH HAS BEEN HELD BY ISIS
SINCE 2014.
A SPOKESMAN FOR IRAQI FORCES
SAYS THE U.S.-BACKED TROOPS
REACHED THE EASTERN BANK OF THE
TIGRIS RIVER FOR THE FIRST TIME
SINCE THEIR OFFENSIVE BEGAN
THREE MONTHS AGO.
FORMER IRANIAN PRESIDENT AKBAR
HASHEMI RAFSANJANI DIED TODAY
AFTER SUFFERING A HEART ATTACK.
HE WAS 82-YEARS-OLD.
RAFSANJANI WAS AT THE CENTER OF
IRANIAN POLITICAL LIFE SINCE THE
1979 ISLAMIC REVOLUTION AND WAS
A TOP AIDE TO ITS LEADER,
AYATOLLAH KHOMEINI.
AS IRAN'S PRESIDENT FROM 1989 TO
1997, RAFSANJANI WAS CONSIDERED
A RELATIVE PRAGMATIST AND
REFORMER WHO SOUGHT BETTER
RELATIONS WITH THE U.S. AND THE
WEST.
HE LATER SUPPORTED IRAN'S
NUCLEAR DISARMAMENT DEAL WITH
WORLD POWERS AND WAS A MENTOR TO
THE CURRENT IRANIAN PRESIDENT,
HASSAN ROUHANI.
TODAY, THERE ARE ABOUT 5,000
JUVENILES INCARCERATED IN ADULT
JAILS AND PRISONS IN THE UNITED
STATES.
ALL 50 STATES GIVE PROSECUTORS
THE DISCRETION TO CHARGE
JUVENILES AS ADULTS, USUALLY FOR
THE MOST SERIOUS CRIMES, BUT
ONLY TWO STATES, NORTH CAROLINA
AND NEW YORK, STILL REQUIRE 16
AND 17-YEAR-OLDS TO BE CHARGED
AND PROSECUTED AS ADULTS FOR ALL
CRIMES.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
"NEWSHOUR WEEKEND"'S IVETTE
FELICIANO REPORTS ABOUT THE
DEBATE IN NEW YORK STATE TO
RAISE THE AGE OF ADULT CRIMINAL
RESPONSIBILITY.
THIS REPORT IS PART OF THE
NEWSHOUR SERIES ON CRIMINAL
JUSTICE REFORM, "BROKEN
JUSTICE."
>> Reporter: 22-YEAR-OLD ASAD
GILES FEELS LUCKY TO HAVE HIS
JOB AS AN ADMINISTRATIVE
ASSISTANT IN THIS MIDTOWN
MANHATTAN HOTEL.
HE SAYS LIFE COULD BE
DRASTICALLY DIFFERENT RIGHT NOW.
FIVE YEARS AGO, AT 17, THE NYPD
ARRESTED GILES FOR ALLEGEDLY
SHOOTING A FEMALE CLASSMATE
AFTER THEY'D BOTH LEFT A SCHOOL
FUNDRAISER.
HIS NAME AND ADDRESS WERE ALL
OVER LOCAL NEWS REPORTS.
AND THEN, HE WAS INCARCERATED AT
NEW YORK CITY'S MAIN JAIL FOR
PRE-TRIAL SUSPECTS ON RIKERS
ISLAND.
>> I COULDN'T BELIEVE IT WAS
HAPPENING.
IT WAS MY SENIOR YEAR IN HIGH
SCHOOL.
I WAS ABOUT TO GO TO COLLEGE IN
ATLANTA.
IT WAS LIKE A BAD DREAM.
>> Reporter: GILES DENIED THE
CHARGES, BUT HIS WORKING CLASS
FAMILY IN JAMAICA, QUEENS, COULD
NOT AFFORD HIS BAIL, SET AT
$100,000.
HE SPENT HIS 18TH AND 19TH
BIRTHDAYS-- WHAT WOULD HAVE BEEN
HIS FIRST TWO YEARS OF COLLEGE--
BEHIND BARS.
HE SAYS ON HIS FIRST DAY INSIDE,
HE WITNESSED A TEEN GETTING BEAT
UP.
>> IT'S PRETTY VICIOUS IN THERE.
YOU GOT RAPISTS, MURDERERS.
YOU GOT ALL TYPE OF PEOPLE IN
THERE.
YOU NEVER KNOW WHAT CAN HAPPEN.
YOU COULD BE ASLEEP, SOMEBODY
BEATING ON YOU.
>> Reporter: FINALLY, AFTER 28
MONTHS ON RIKERS, GILES, SEEN
HERE WITH HIS NEPHEW, GOT HIS
DAY IN COURT, AND A JUDGE
ACQUITTED HIM OF ALL CHARGES.
TO THIS DAY, NO ONE HAS BEEN
CONVICTED IN THAT SHOOTING.
GILES SAYS HE'S STILL
TRAUMATIZED.
>> IF I WALK INTO A STORE AND
THERE'S A GROUP OF COPS IN
THERE, I WOULD LEAVE THE STORE.
JUST BECAUSE I GOT INCARCERATED
FOR SOMETHING I DIDN'T DO.
SO IT'S LIKE, ARE THEY GOING TO
DO IT AGAIN?
>> Reporter: GILES SAYS HIS
RESIDUAL FEARS STEM FROM THE
FACT THAT AT 17-YEARS-OLD, HE
WAS HELD AT AN ADULT JAIL,
RATHER THAN A JUVENILE DETENTION
CENTER.
NORTH CAROLINA AND NEW YORK ARE
THE ONLY STATES THAT,
AUTOMATICALLY DETAIN, PROSECUTE,
AND INCARCERATE ALL 16 AND 17-
YEAR-OLDS AS ADULTS REGARDLESS
OF THE CRIME.
IN NEW YORK, MORE THAN 27-
THOUSAND 16 AND 17-YEAR-OLDS
WERE ARRESTED IN 2015, MORE THAN
2,000 OF THEM WERE CONVICTED AND
SPENT TIME INCARCERATED.
ON ANY GIVEN DAY, SOME 700 16
AND 17-YEAR-OLDS IN NEW YORK ARE
LOCKED UP IN ADULT JAILS
AWAITING THE OUTCOME OF THEIR
CASES.
ABOUT 200 OF THEM, MOSTLY BLACK
AND LATINO, ARE AT RIKERS.
UPON ASAD GILES' RELEASE, THE
ORGANIZATION "FRIENDS OF ISLAND
ACADEMY," HELPED HIM ENROLL IN
COLLEGE AND FIND HIS HOTEL JOB.
>> THEY DEFINITELY PUT ME ON MY
FEET.
A GOOD JUMP.
A GOOD TRANSITION.
>> Reporter: FOR ALMOST THREE
DECADES, THE ORGANIZATION HAS
PROVIDED POST-INCARCERATION
SERVICES TO JUVENILES NOT
OFFERED BY NEW YORK STATE.
>> I'VE WATCHED PEOPLE GROW UP
IN THE PRISON SYSTEM.
>> Reporter: MESSIAH RAMKISSOON
WORKS WITH THE GROUP AS A
PROGRAM DIRECTOR AND BELIEVES A
SUCCESSFUL TRANSITION BACK INTO
SOCIETY IS ESSENTIAL IN REDUCING
RECIDIVISM.
HE ALSO POINTS TO STUDIES
SHOWING THAT THE HUMAN BRAIN IS
HIGHLY MALLEABLE UP UNTIL YOUR
MID-TWENTIES.
AND THAT, UNTIL THAT AGE, THE
PARTS OF OUR BRAINS RESPONSIBLE
FOR DECISION-MAKING AND IMPULSE
CONTROL AREN'T FULLY DEVELOPED.
>> THAT 16, 17-YEAR-OLD AGE
BRACKET, 18, SOMETIMES OLDER,
THE BRAIN IS STILL DEVELOPING.
SO WHAT THIS ENVIRONMENT DOES IS
SHAPES THE NATURE OF THE BEING.
SO YOU HAVE YOUNG PEOPLE WHO
COME OUT AND THEY TELL YOU, "I'M
NOT AFRAID TO GO RIGHT BACK,"
BECAUSE PART OF THEIR PSYCHE AND
THE WAY THEY THINK AND
DEVELOPMENT OF THE BRAIN HAS
BEEN COMPOSED BEHIND THESE BARS.
HE'S BEEN THROUGH A LOT DURING
THE 16 MONTHS HE'S BEEN
INCARCERATED
>> Reporter: ON A RECENT TUESDAY
MORNING AT THE GROUP'S
HEADQUARTERS IN HARLEM, THE
STAFF MEET TO DISCUSS OTHER
CASES AS PART OF THEIR NEW"
YOUTH REENTRY NETWORK," FUNDED
BY A 3-MILLION DOLLAR A YEAR
GRANT FROM THE NEW YORK CITY
DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS.
>> HE'S NOT IN CONTACT WITH
ANYONE IN TERMS OF FAMILY.
>> Reporter: AS PART OF THIS NEW
PROGRAM LAUNCHED IN NOVEMBER,
THESE YOUTH ADVOCATES ACT AS THE
POINT PERSON FOR EVERY 16 AND
17-YEAR-OLD INCARCERATED AT
RIKERS OFFERING THEM SUPPORT BY
HELPING THEIR LAWYERS EXPEDITE
THEIR CASES, OR RE-CONNECTING
THEM TO FAMILY MEMBERS AND
KEEPING TABS ON TEENS IF THEY
GET RELEASED.
>> ANY TIME A CHILD IS ARRESTED,
CUFFED AND HELD, WHATEVER SYSTEM
YOU'RE IN, IT'S TRAUMATIZING.
>> Reporter: CHRIS PAHIGIAN IS
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF FRIENDS OF
ISLAND ACADEMY.
>> THE ROLE OF THE REENTRY
NETWORK OR ANY SYSTEM OF
AFTERCARE SUPPORT IS THAT WE
KNOW COMING OUT OF THE BOX WHERE
IT IS YOU'RE GOING TO GO HOME
TO.
AND TO HAVE A PLAN IN PLACE AND
TO HELP NAVIGATE AND IMPLEMENT
THAT PLAN ONCE THEY GET HOME.
>> Reporter: THERE'S ALSO
EMOTIONAL AND MENTAL HEALTH
COUNSELING.
ON A TYPICAL NIGHT HERE,
FORMERLY INCARCERATED PEOPLE
MEET TO DISCUSS THEIR EXPERIENCE
BEING LOCKED UP AS AN
ADOLESCENT.
>> FOR DECADES WE HAVE BEEN
CRIMINALIZING YOUNG PEOPLE,
LOCKING YOUNG PEOPLE UP IN
MASSES.
SO NOW, WE HAVE GENERATIONS OF
PEOPLE WHO CARRY THE STIGMA AND
WHO CARRY THE TRAUMA OF THAT
PROCESS.
>> Reporter: THAT STIGMA AND
TRAUMA HAS BEEN ON THE RISE
SINCE THE 1970S, WHEN THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT AND STATES
BEGAN ADOPTING HARSHER
SENTENCING LAWS FOR DRUG CRIMES,
INCLUDING FOR JUVENILES.
IN THE 1990S, THE ADVENT OF
MANDATORY MINIMUM SENTENCES AND
THE EXPANSION OF JUVENILE
TRANSFER LAWS INCREASINGLY
SHIFTED CONTROL OF JUVENILE
CASES FROM FAMILY COURTS TO
REGULAR CRIMINAL COURTS.
THAT DECADE, THE NUMBER OF
JUVENILES INCARCERATED IN ADULT
JAILS QUADRUPLED. BUT SINCE
2000, SPURRED BY THE RESEARCH ON
THE SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC COSTS OF
INCARCERATING YOUTH, LIKE
INCREASED SUICIDE RATES AND
RECIDIVISM, STATE LEGISLATURES
CHANGED THEIR LAWS.
AND, BY 2014, THOSE NUMBERS
DECREASED BY MORE THAN HALF.
>> THE FUNDAMENTAL DIFFERENCE IS
THAT IN THE FAMILY COURT, THAT
CHILD WHO IS CHARGED WITH A
CRIME IS VIEWED AS SOMEBODY WHO
IS A CHILD, FOR WHOM ELEMENTS OF
REHABILITATION AND SUPPORT MUST
BE PUT IN PLACE.
>> Reporter: THREE-QUARTERS OF
16- AND 17-YEAR-OLDS WHO ARE
ARRESTED IN NEW YORK STATE FACE
MISDEMEANOR CHARGES FOR OFFENSES
LIKE POSSESSION OF MARIJUANA OR
VANDALISM.
BUT ONE QUARTER ARE
PROSECUTED AS ADULTS FOR MORE
SERIOUS FELONY CHARGES LIKE
ROBBERY AND DRUG TRAFFICKING.
ARGUMENTS FOR "RAISING THE AGE"
OF ADULT CRIMINAL RESPONSIBILITY
FROM 16 TO 18 HAVE FALLEN FLAT
IN THE NEW YORK STATE
LEGISLATURE EACH TIME PROPOSALS
HAVE COME UP FOR A VOTE IN THE
PAST THREE YEARS.
>> WHAT I'M SUGGESTING IS THAT
WE JUST DON'T CHANGE AN ENTIRE
SYSTEM UNTIL WE KNOW MORE.
>> Reporter: PATRICK GALLIVAN
CHAIRS THE CRIME, CRIME VICTIMS,
AND CORRECTIONS COMMITTEE IN THE
NEW YORK STATE SENATE.
HE'S ALSO THE FORMER SHERIFF OF
ERIE COUNTY, WHICH INCLUDES
BUFFALO.
HE'S VOTED AGAINST RAISING THE
AGE.
>> PEOPLE ARE SAYING THAT, JEEZ,
OUR YOUNG PEOPLE SHOULDN'T BE
INCARCERATED.
OUR YOUNG PEOPLE DESERVE A
CHANCE.
CHILDREN SHOULD BE TREATED
DIFFERENT THAN ADULTS.
WHO CAN SAY NO TO THAT, JUST ON
THE PREMISE?
ANYBODY WHO RAISES QUESTIONS CAN
BE LOOKED AT AS A BIG BAD OGRE
WHEN THEY'RE RAISING QUESTIONS
BUT THAT ISN'T THE CASE AT ALL.
>> Reporter: GALLIVAN ARGUES
THAT INCARCERATED 16 AND 17-
YEAR-OLDS ARE OFTEN TREATED
DIFFERENTLY THAN ADULTS IN THAT
THEIR CRIMINAL RECORDS CAN BE
SEALED.
AND, DUE TO THE PRISON RAPE
ELIMINATION ACT PASSED BY
CONGRESS, ALL FEDERAL AND STATE
PRISONS MUST SEPARATELY HOUSE
JUVENILES UNDER 18 FROM ADULTS.
THE ARGUMENT THAT I'VE HEARD
FROM RAISE THE AGE ADVOCATES IS
THAT JUST TOUCHING THE ADULT
CRIMINAL SYSTEM CAN HAVE A LONG-
LASTING IMPACT.
BEING HOUSED AT A PLACE LIKE
RIKERS FOR 18, 19 MONTHS WHILE
YOU'RE WAITING FOR YOUR TRIAL TO
START.
>> THE BULLET HAS THE SAME
IMPACT.
RECENTLY- IN THIS ERIE COUNTY
AREA, AN INDIVIDUAL WAS
CONVICTED OF CRIMES THAT WERE
COMMITTED WHEN HE WAS OVER 16
BUT UNDER 18 YEARS OLD.
HE KILLED TWO PEOPLE.
SHOT SIX OTHERS.
WELL, MY GOSH, SHOULD AN
INDIVIDUAL LIKE THAT BE
SUBJECTED OR GET A LESSER
SENTENCE?
>> SOME OF OUR MOST VIOLENT
OFFENDERS ARE TEENAGERS.
>> Reporter: MICHAEL FLAHERTY,
WHO JUST STEPPED DOWN AS THE
ACTING DISTRICT ATTORNEY FOR
ERIE COUNTY, SAYS REQUIRING ALL
JUVENILE CASES TO BE HEARD IN
FAMILY COURT WOULD STRIP AWAY A
PROSECUTOR'S TOOLS TO ADEQUATELY
TRY TEENS IN CRIMINAL COURT WHEN
NEEDED.
>> UNDER THE CURRENT SYSTEM I
HAVE A VOICE, I HAVE A SAY, I
GET TO USE MY PROFESSIONAL
JUDGMENT.
WHAT WE DON'T NEED IS A UNIFORM
POLICY WHICH PRESUMES THAT THE
BEST INTERESTS OF THE OFFENDER
TRUMP PUBLIC SAFETY, OR TRUMP
THE JUSTICE SYSTEM.
WE DISMISS CHARGES ALL THE TIME,
JUST ON REVIEWING THE PAPERS,
AND THE FACTS.
I HAVE NO CONTROL OVER WHAT
HAPPENS IN FAMILY COURT.
>> Reporter: WITH NO FORTHCOMING
CHANGES IN STATE LAW, AND AS
PART OF REFORMS IN RESPONSE TO A
FEDERAL INVESTIGATION
DOCUMENTING WIDESPREAD ABUSE AT
JUVENILES AT RIKERS, NEW YORK
CITY MAYOR DE BLASIO ANNOUNCED
LAST YEAR THAT 16 AND 17-YEAR-
OLDS WOULD BE MOVED OFF RIKERS
BY 2020, AND HE ENDED SOLITARY
CONFINEMENT FOR ANYONE YOUNGER
THAN 21.
THE NEW YORK CITY DEPARTMENT OF
CORRECTIONS IS SUBJECTING RIKERS
GUARDS TO MORE RIGOROUS
TRAINING, IN ADDITION TO THE
JAIL'S PARTNERSHIP WITH FRIENDS
OF ISLAND ACADEMY, IT RECENTLY
INCREASED EDUCATIONAL
PROGRAMMING FOR JUVENILES.
FRIENDS OF ISLAND ACADEMY PLANS
TO PUSH THIS YEAR FOR THE STATE
TO RAISE THE AGE OF ADULT
CRIMINALITY TO 18.
FOR NOW, THE ORGANIZATION WILL
CONTINUE SUPPORTING YOUTH
TRANSITIONING OUT OF
INCARCERATION WITH ADULTS, LIKE
ASAD GILES, SOMETHING HE
BELIEVES HELPED KEEP HIM FROM
EVER BEING ARRESTED AGAIN.
>> I COULD HAVE GOTTEN OUT WITH
A JAIL MINDSET LIKE "F"
EVERYTHING.
I DON'T WANT TO GO BACK TO
SCHOOL I JUST WANT TO STAY IN
THE STREETS.
BUT I DIDN'T WANT THAT FOR
MYSELF, SO I CONTACTED FRIENDS
AND JUST GOT READY TO MAKE MY
LIFE BETTER.
>>WHY IS IT SO DIFFICULT TO
OBTAIN CONVICTIONS IN HATE
CRIME CASES?
FIND OUT AT pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: IN SYRIA TODAY,
STATE-RUN MEDIA SAYS A CAR BOMB
EXPLODED IN A GOVERNMENT-HELD
AREA OUTSIDE THE CAPITAL CITY OF
DAMASCUS, KILLING AT LEAST FIVE
PEOPLE AND WOUNDING 15.
YESTERDAY, IN THE REBEL-HELD
TOWN OF AZAZ, IN ALEPPO
PROVINCE, AT LEAST 43 PEOPLE
WERE KILLED AFTER A FUEL TRUCK
BOMB EXPLODED.
ITN'S JANE DODGE HAS THIS
REPORT, FROM THE MOMENTS
IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING THE BLAST
IN AZAZ.
A WARNING: THIS STORY CONTAINS
GRAPHIC IMAGES.
>> AS CHILDREN RUN FOR THEIR
LIVES AND TWO MEN TRY TO DRAG
ANOTHER TO SAFETY, FALLING
DEBRIS SMASHES ON TO THE
PAVEMENT.
THEN A MAN EMERGES FROM THE
SMOKE.
HIS CLOTHES ARE ON FIRE BUT HE
DOESN'T STOP, DISCARDING HIS
BURNING JACKET AS HE CONTINUES
TO RUN.
ANOTHER INJURED SURVIVOR
STUMBLES FROM THE SCENE.
THESE PICTURES SERE FILMED BY AN
ACTIVIST IN AZAZ JUST MOMENTS
AFTER A MASSIVE BOMB PACKED INTO
A FUEL TANKER EXPLODED OUTSIDE
THE TOWN.
MOST OF THOSE KILLED WERE
CIVILIANS, SOME OF THEM LAWYERS
AND JUDGES, AZAZ IS THE MAJOR
STRONGHOLD OF THE TURKISH BACK
FREE SYRIAN ARMY AND SOME OF ITS
REBEL FIGHTERS ALSO DIED.
>> A LARGE LUMBER OF BODIES HAVE
COME US TO.
20 SO FAR.
WE'VE ALSO RECEIVED LOTS OF
INJURED PEOPLE.
>> PEOPLE THANKED GOD AS ONE MAN
WAS RESCUED FROM THE RUBBLE OF
THE BUILDING.
SOME OF THE INJURED WERE TAKEN
ACROSS THE BORDER TO A HOSPITAL
IN TURKEY.
TURKISH AND KURDISH NEWS
AGENCIES ARE BLAMING SO THE
CALLED ISLAMIC STATE FOR THE
BOMBING BUT SO FAR NO GROUP HAS
CLAIMED RESPONSIBILITY.
IS HAS TRIED TO TAKE THE TOWN
SEVERAL TIMES SINCE IT
ORIGINALLY HELD AZAZ IN
20-- 2013.
>> Sreenivasan: FINALLY, A
SUSPECT IS IN CUSTODY FOR
SHOOTING AND WOUNDING AN
AMERICAN FOREIGN SERVICE OFFICER
IN MEXICO'S SECOND BIGGEST CITY,
GUADALAJARA.
MEXICAN OFFICIALS DID NOT NAME
THE SUSPECT OR HIS MOTIVE, BUT
THE VICTIM IS IN STABLE
CONDITION AFTER BEING SHOT WHILE
IN HIS CAR AS HE DROVE OUT OF A
PARKING LOT FRIDAY EVENING.
THE CONSULATE RELEASED SECURITY
CAMERA VIDEO OF THE SHOOTING,
AND THE FBI OFFERED A 20-
THOUSAND DOLLAR REWARD FOR
INFORMATION LEADING TO THE
ARREST.
TOMORROW ON THE NEWSHOUR, OUR
SERIES "THE OBAMA YEARS"
CONTINUES WITH A REPORT FROM
OHIO ON THE PRESIDENT'S
HEALTHCARE REFORM.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.